# HHHGraph Land
This repo generates the files, distances and adjacency needed for GNN training for HHH signal vs. background discrimination.

TODO: info about checking out wiht submodule for the bespoke pyg version.

## Configuration
`config/user_<name>.yaml` contains user specific settings, currently including the paths where your inputs/outputs should be stored, and what signal model you are running over.
`config/ml_default.yaml` contains the ML architecture setup, including the number/nature of GCN/MLP layers, dropout and learning rates, LL, number of epochs.
`config/ml_<label>.yaml` can be made and would contain the ML architecture setup, for any other particular architecture you want to save for future use, just give it a label.

## Dataset splitting
`write_files.py` splits the root ntuples into training, validation and test datasets, and outputs them as h5 files.
It currently assumes one type of background is present! 
Your user config must be given so it knows where the ntuples live and where to store the h5 files to.
```
python write_files.py -u config/user_<name>.yaml
```

## Plot kinematics
If you want to make plots of the kinematic variables in the signal and background h5s, use this script...
the 'LQ-All' variable set option can be used if you want.
```
python plot_kinematics.py -v <type of variables> -u config/user_<name>.yaml 
```

## Distance calculation
Linking lengths requires calculating a specific type of pair-wise distance for a specified set of variables, for a given dataset.
These can be specified when running
```
python calc_distance.py -v <type of variables> -d <distance> -u config/user_<name>.yaml -b <batch size, default 10000>
```
where the variables are separated into types mass, `angular`, `shape`, `mass_and_angular`, `mass_and_shape` for HHH signal, `LQ-HighLevel` or `LQ-LowLevel` for LQ signal, `all` and `distance` for stau signal.
The types of distances calculated are `euclidean`, `cityblock`, `cosine`, and `emd`, the functions that calculate them can be found in `utils/distances.py`.
The distances and the pair-wise event weights are saved in `.pt` files in your 'dist_path'.

## Linking lengths
Once the distances are calculated and saved, linking lengths can be generated between sig-sig and sig-bkg distances, or sig-sig and bkg-bkg distances. The linking length is decided from looking at the ROC curve between these distributions, you can either choose a point on the ROC curve that corresponds to a specific efficiency to connect the 'friendly' species (the fraction of links between signal events to other signal events) if target_eff is set in your config. alternatively you can choose the length based on the total fraction of possible edges in the graph that are drawn, if you have edge_frac set in your config. The ROC curves, and linking lengths at different sig-sig efficiencies can be generated by running:
```
python linking_length.py -v <type of variables> -d <distance>  -u config/user_<name>.yaml> -b <batch size, default 10000>
```
and the sig-sig vs. bkg-bkg, sig-sig vs. sig-bkg linking lengths are saved in json files in your 'll_path'. The lists of possible target_eff and edge_frac values to consider are also set in this file.

## Adjacency matrix
The adjacency matrix that defines the edges of between events are generated using a specified linking length. This is calculated in `torch_adj_builder.py`, and it uses functions from the script `utils/adj_mat.py`.
```
python torch_adj_builder.py -c config/ml_<config file>.yaml -u config/user_<name>.yaml -b <batch size, default 10000>
```

The linking length used here is the same if generated from comparing sig-sig with bkg-bkg distances or from sig-sig with sig-bkg distances by specifying, just using the target efficiency or edge fraction. Alternatively, the linking length can be manually set in the `ml_<config>.yaml` file. If a manual linking length are specified, this will be used instead of the target_eff/edge_frac. 

## Training
Training can be run for your choice of ML alg, by running: 
```
python torch_train.py -c config/ml_<config file>.yaml -u config/user_<name>.yaml
```
This will retrieve the kinematics from the input h5 events, and the adj matrix, and use these for training.
The config file should contain the type of GNN layer, the type of kinematic variables, the type of distance metric, sig-sig efficiencies (or linking length directly), and training hyperparameters.
For an out-of-the-box test use `ml_default.yaml`
The linking length can be manually set in the `ml_<config>.yaml` file, so long as the adj matrix was already constructed with this linking length using `torch_adj_builder.py`, or you can specify the target_eff/edge_frac as along as you also used this for the adj_building step.
The model can be specified in the config file, including number of gcn and regular mlp layers and their sizes. Note: if there are no hidden gcn layers, model is equivalent to a regular dnn. 

There are currently three supported GNN layer types:
- `GCN`: The GCNConv layer applies the normalisation scheme $`D^{-1/2} A D^{-1/2}`$ used in the "Semi-supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks" paper (https://arxiv.org/pdf/1609.02907.pdf).
- `GAT`: The GATConv layer applies the graph attention operator used in the "Graph Attention Networks" paper (https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10903).
- `Graph`: The GraphConv  layer applies the graph neural network operator from the “Weisfeiler and Leman Go Neural: Higher-order Graph Neural Networks” paper (https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.02244).


## Workflow of EmbeddingNet
To train EmbeddingNet, go to `GraphBuilder`. First you need to construct a config file `config/`, take `embedding.yaml` as an example.

To train an EmbeddingNet, run
```
python train.py -u <config_file_path>
```
This will train an EmbeddingNet on a subset of the events specified in the config file

To apply a trained EmbeddingNet to the full or an orthoganol dataset, run
```
python apply.py -u <config_file_path> -m <model_file_path>
```

if `<model_file_path>` is empty, the script will take the model configuration specified in the config file, but if `<model_file_path>` is specified, it will evaluated that model. This will evaluate the model and save the per-event outputs (embedding features) to h5 files, saved in the `embedding_path` directory specified in the config file.

To calculate the distances in the latent space built from the EmbeddingNet, exit the `GraphBuilder` directory. Use a user config file similar to the `config/user_Maggie_embedding.yaml` file, where
    - `feature_h5_path` should have the same direcotry  as the one in `embedding_path` in `GraphBuilder/config/embedding.yaml`. 
    - `kinematic_h5_path` should be the directory to your h5 files that contains the raw kinematic variables for sig and bakcgrounds.
    - `feature_dim` specifies the dimension of the latent space your chosen EmbeddingNet outputs.
To calculate distances in the latent space, run
```
python calc_distance.py -v embedding -d <distance> -u <config_file_path>
```
Once you have this you can construct the linking length, adjacency matrix and run the training using the same steps as above.
